---
title: 'Feature Announcement: Volumes in the cloud'
---

When building microservices in the cloud, if you were to use the default Postgres container for your
database, all of the data would be stored in the container itself. Because containers are meant to
be destroyed and recreated, the data in that container would be lost every time the container is
replaced. The solution for this is easy: use a volume. Mount a path on the host, put the data there,
and every time the container is replaced, it mounts to that place on the host system. There's one
problem: in hosted cloud environments, there is no dry land. There's no “host” for you to mount a
volume to.

{/* truncate */}

## Volumes in Kubernetes

Fortunately, you can create volumes for a Kubernetes cluster. Unfortunately, this can be a bit
tricky. Often developers don't have access to the cluster, so it might require coordination with the
operations team to get those volume instructions added. Usually, the team will bring a tool like
Terraform or write the configuration by hand. This infrastructure code usually lives in a separate
repository which can make keeping the infrastructure configuration in sync with your application's
needs can be a hassle.

Volumes in Architect are much easier to work with. The architect.yml file lives right in the code
repository, making it much easier for developers to reason about the entire system at once. The
[volume spec](https://docs.architect.io/reference/architect-yml/#volumespec) in the architect.yml
file allows developers to create volumes that work seamlessly whether the application is run locally
or deployed to a cloud service like AWS, GCP, or Azure. So how does it work? I'm glad you asked.

volumes: src: mount_path: /file/dir/in/container host_path: ./dir/on/host/machine

Add the `volumes` spec with the `mount_path` (the path that will be used to access the volume within
the container) and the `host_path` (the path that contains the files on the host machine that the
container will want to access). So for a Postgres container image, you might want to mount a volume
to point to the database files that Postgres uses. Something like:

```yaml
volumes:
  src:
    mount_path: /var/lib/postgresql
    host_path: ./db/files
```

In a regular Dockerfile, this would mean that every time you went to `/var/lib/postgresql` in the
container, you would actually be using the files in the local machine's current directory
`./db/files`. Which works okay locally, but remember there's no host machine to use if you're
deploying to a cloud provider. The way that Architect works around this is by tarring and gzipping
the directory indicated in the `host_path` and delivers it to a cloud volume and mounts that to the
mount point in the container.

It's important to remember that the contents of the `host_path` are compressed and stored in the
same Docker registry system that your container uses, and is done at registration time. This means
that your data is still under the same access control it has always been.

This means that using volumes in Architect just got MUCH easier. No longer would developers have to
coordinate with the operations team and create two different configurations for local and cloud
deployments. Simply use the volume spec, and have access to that volume in your local, test, and
test environments!

Be aware that these volumes will be overwritten on every deployment. This is not recommended for
production databases. The best practice is to use a managed database service and connect to it as an
external service to keep persistent data no matter how often you deploy or destroy and create
containers.

## Learn more about volumes

If you'd like to learn more about volumes or microservices, check out the links below!

- [Architect Documentation on Volumes](/docs/components/deployments/)
- [Microservice tools: The top 10 for monitoring and testing](/blog/2022/08/30/microservices-top-10-testing-monitoring/)
- [Test environments: Everything you need to know](/blog/2022/08/09/test-environment-guide/)

Also, don't forget to follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/architect_team) so that you never
miss a post or feature update from Architect!
