---
title: Five tips for successfully managing dependencies
authors: tyler.aldrich
---

The era of the monolithic application is over, and it has been replaced by a distributed,
microservice-oriented world. Modern applications and services are no longer independent; instead,
they are highly _dependent_ on a host of external systems and code. Without these dependencies, the
service or application will not run correctly, if it even runs at all.

Unfortunately, managing these dependencies successfully is not as simple as just making sure that
all your dependencies exist; it's a complex task that needs to consider not just what your system
relies on but also what other systems rely on you. Additionally, it isn't isolated to just part of
your team—successful management is critical for _all_ of your engineers. From developers to
architects, the whole team needs to understand proper dependency management.

In this blog post, we'll look at five tips for managing your dependencies so that your teams can
implement changes safely and efficiently.

{/* truncate */}

Let's start with a look at the importance of dependency management.

## Why is dependency management important?

Let's consider for a moment what it takes to start up a typical authentication service. It likely
depends on a database to store active and expired sessions, an API to create and read tokens, and a
user service to verify user information. In a microservices architecture, services are kept small in
order to manage individual service complexity; however, this separation of concerns increases the
amount of integration necessary for a fully functional system.

At a minimum, even so-called monolithic applications depend on a database for data persistence and
perhaps other services for scheduling and running time-consuming jobs. Managing these dependencies
involves time-consuming communication, which becomes difficult to scale as your organization grows.
It may even be difficult to run this monolith locally without mocked or simulated dependencies, and
this introduces the risk that you're not developing in an environment that sufficiently mirrors
production.

Lacking insight into these dependencies can slow down your organization. For example, your
architecture team may not have the full picture of the dependencies of each service, making it hard
for them to understand the ramifications of changes throughout the system. Alternatively, a
development team may not fully understand how much other teams depend on their APIs.

Additionally, organizations will find it challenging to quickly expand to new regions or cloud
providers if they don't know what services need to be provisioned and in what order. Every service
has relationships with others in your ecosystem, and a bird's-eye view of those relationships is
often lacking.

In an interconnected service architecture, dependency management is critical. Let's take a look at
how this applies to different roles within your organization.

## Which engineers need dependency management?

The answer is that they all do. Every one of your engineers needs to take a proactive approach to
managing dependencies; however, this approach will differ depending on the role.

#### Software engineers

New members of a software development team need to understand dependencies quickly so they can start
contributing. Dependencies may be updated frequently, so documentation can quickly become outdated
and is often only reviewed when new team members join. That said, new team members can often help
the team become aware of documentation that needs updating.

A developer should run the application locally with the same dependency versions that are running in
production. Most applications won't run properly without their dependencies, and those that do are
at risk for unexpected behavior. Developers need to know which version of a dependency their
application depends on and how to access it.

#### QA engineers

Much of what was written above for software engineers applies also to QA engineers. QA engineers
also need documentation to set up and run a service—either to test it manually or to perform
automated testing. An additional consideration is that QA engineers need to know about dependencies
so they can _mock_ them appropriately when writing tests.

#### Site Reliability/DevOps engineers

The SRE or DevOps engineer often wants to know if an application can gracefully restart or if it
requires manual intervention to ensure services start-up in the proper order. While the individual
services may be developed by different teams, SREs, and DevOps engineers need to know _how_ to start
or restart these services in production environments with minimal downtime.

#### Architects

Architects need a way to discover dependencies in order to plan application restructuring for growth
or stability. Knowledge of the coupling of services can help guide rebalancing and stability
improvements.

Now that we've gone through the importance of dependency management for your organization, let's
look at five tips for successful dependency management.

## Tip # 1: Implement semantic versioning

Using [semantic versioning](https://semver.org/) to version your services communicates the impact of
changes. The semantic versioning framework has three main version numbers:
`<major>`.`<minor>`.`<patch>`. For APIs in particular, the minor and patch values may be less
important because incrementing those fields does not indicate a breaking change. When the major
version is incremented, a breaking change has been made to the API, and consumers of the API can use
that information to more rigorously test their integration with the API before using the new
version.

If your service exposes REST APIs, then the root of the path could be where versions live, such as
in /v2/api/users/. Signaling a breaking change by increasing the version allows your dependents to
know a change has happened. Do not remove the lower version APIs at this time. Instead, let
consumers know that the lower version is deprecated, and give them time to upgrade without outages.
This is a low-cost solution that developers can implement and maintain. Many languages have
libraries that provide easy management of the version number for a system or package.

Maintaining a versioning schema is a simple, cost-effective way to communicate changes and can serve
as a baseline for dependency management in your software project. Semantic versioning takes the
guesswork out of “how and when should we version” and allows developers to solve problems.

## Tip #2: Use contract testing

Contract tests validate an API schema “handshake” between consumers and producers of an API.
Contract tests are handy in that they can be run in CI pipelines and give fast feedback if API
changes break the contract between consumers and producers of an API. An upside is the contracts can
live in the respective code repositories and are visible to development teams. The downside is that
these contracts must be kept updated and can drift from how the actual, existing API behaves.

## Tip #3: Run synthetic tests

Synthetic tests are API test frameworks typically run in the cloud to mimic critical user journeys
throughout a microservice ecosystem. For example, let's say you want to ensure that a user can log
in, browse a catalog, and purchase a product. You would write a synthetic test that would hit each
service in this chain of events as if it was a real user in a browser, validating the responses
after each request to ensure every service's API functions as expected. Synthetic tests often
measure more than simple functionality; they can also yield important performance and correctness
metrics.

Synthetic tests can be written and maintained by Software and QA engineers, but there are a handful
of platforms that offer low-code or code-free synthetic testing frameworks. Using a synthetic
testing platform can save time, but does come with downsides. These tests require maintenance
outside of the code base of each individual service, and that maintenance can be time-consuming if
changes are not clearly communicated. It's not uncommon for synthetic test maintenance to be
overlooked when making changes to service APIs. For synthetic tests to continue providing value,
this maintenance must be ongoing.

## Tip #4: Adopt compliance and standards management tools

[OpsLevel](https://www.opslevel.com/) is a tool primarily concerned with ensuring a development
organization is setting and following standards across the board. It can also build a service
dependency map that can be used by developers, SREs, or architects, helping them to understand the
interdependencies of services inside the company. The downside here is this map is curated manually,
which can often leave it incomplete or drifting from reality.

## Tip #5: Use Architect's dependency management platform

[Architect](https://www.architect.io/) has a deployment management tool that makes dependency
awareness a first-class citizen. Architect employs a declarative YAML syntax for setting up service
deployments that have dependency checks and awareness built in.

Here's an example of a service dependent on the authentication API:

```yml
dependencies:
  authentication: 1.2.1

services:
  my-api:
    interfaces:
      http: 8080
    environment:
      AUTH_INTERNAL: ${{ dependencies.authentication.services.auth.interfaces.http.url }}
      AUTH_EXTERNAL: ${{ dependencies.authentication.services.auth.interfaces.http.ingress.url }}
```

The name of the service is clearly defined along with the version of the API (in semantic version
format, no less)! This is very similar to using a package manager for software libraries that
developers, SREs, and architects will recognize.

Architect provides additional functionality with respect to dependencies in their syntax,
specifically allowing for different protocols, service-to-service authentication, and the usual
host, port, and path values. All this adds up to make a system that is easy to configure, and one
that injects a lot of smarts into your deployments organization-wide.

With dependency management in Architect, all levels of your organization benefit. Your design
architects can use this to plan and modify large sets of functionality composed of microservices.
SREs and DevOps engineers gain insight into service dependencies. Developers know what services and
versions their service depends on and importantly, what teams depend on _their_ APIs, along with
what versions.

A bonus for using Architect for service dependencies is that it facilitates the creation of a
**service catalog** that can be used for service discovery. A service catalog allows developers to
browse the set of services already developed in an organization, see their dependencies, and decide
if they can use them for a project they are working on. This raises awareness of work throughout the
organization, helping teams follow DRY principles by facilitating reuse instead of rebuilding.

## Learn More

There's a lot of good information here about managing dependencies, but if you'd like to learn more
about microservices and the intricacies of dependency management, check out these other blog posts:

- [5 Key benefits of a microservice architecture](/blog/2023/01/18/five-microservice-architecture-benefits/)
- [The top 3 signs you need on-demand environments](/blog/2023/03/02/top-3-signs-on-demand-environments/)
- [The CI/CD pipeline: A developer's guide](/blog/2022/10/24/cicd-pipeline-guide/)

As always, please leave questions and comments below, and don't forget to follow us on
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/architect_team)!
