---
title: Why distributed apps need dependency management
authors:
  - david.thor
---

Distributed cloud applications (aka microservices) have introduced an enormous amount of complexity
into the design and operation of cloud software. What used to manifest itself as complexity hidden
within a single process or runtime now finds itself spread across tens or hundreds of loosely
coupled services. While all of these services can use different languages and can scale
independently from one another, the distributed nature can often make the app as a whole hard to
navigate, hard to deploy, and hard secure.

{/* truncate */}

This new complexity makes it increasingly difficult to manage and contribute to cloud-native
applications, and beckons questions as to how we can maintain healthy cloud software. How can we
take advantage of the benefits of service-oriented design without introducing friction and cost
elsewhere?

Fortunately we've run into this problem before. Microservices aren't the first pattern that has
forced developers to figure out how to collaborate and contribute to endless webs of interconnected
components. For the last few decades the solution has been the same: dependency management.

We use dependency managers every day to re-use public and private software packages, build upon the
work of others, and gracefully encapulate the details of our own work into consumable formats. There
are a number of reasons why dependency management is the key to unlocking the power of distributed
software, and it's high time we learn from the past to power the future of cloud-native development.

## 1. Developer collaboration

One of the most important functions of dependency managers like [NPM](https://www.npmjs.com/),
[Pip](https://pip.pypa.io/), [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/what-is-maven.html), and others, is to
broker collaboration amongst developers. By providing a consistent packaging mechanic that
seamlessly enables code to be extended, dependency managers have enabled otherwise unrelated teams
to consume each other's work. While these tools can be used within the walls of enterprises to
enable teams to publish and collaborate on their work, we've seen dependency managers used at a much
grander scale to broker collaboration within the open-source community. The consistency of the
tooling and width of adoption has enabled the creation of enormously powerful and freely accessible
libraries for all to use and continue to build upon.

While this level of collaboration has been realized within the communities for individual languages
(NPM for Javascript, Pip for Python, etc.), it has yet to be fully realized within the cloud-native
community. We fortunately have Docker to create consistency in how cloud services are packaged, but
containers don't have enough information about the relationships between services to resolve and
extend dependencies. Adding proper dependency management to index and resolve relationships to peer
apps and services is critical if we want to realize for microservices what others already do with
libraries in individual languages.

## 2. Self-service environments

The collaborative effects of dependency managers don't happen by magic. The main reason consistent
dependency resolvers are so powerful is because developers all around the world are able to
reproduce their effects using the same commands and processes. Reproducibility is a key element of
dependency managers. Without it, no one would be able to download and operate libraries and packages
created by others without complex, custom bootstrapping logic – the creation of which would be an
enormous barrier to adoption and distribution.

Service-oriented applications are no different from language-specific libraries in this regard. Our
ability to extend the work of others is predicated on our ability to run or otherwise access the
services and applications we hope to make calls to. Teams have been able to make due by operating
centralized QA or sandbox environments, but the inability to reproduce these environments creates a
new set of problems. Engineers can't operate their own development environments, services that
depend on others can't be easily shipped, developers are forced to write their own scripts to run
their app locally and remotely, and every team needs to about production-grade tools, networking,
and network security. By leveraging a consistent, dependency management solution, teams need only to
assert the network dependencies for their services to give everyone in the org a consistent way to
spin up services in their stack along with its dependencies – allowing everyone to operate their own
environments.

## 3. Automation

The self-service benefits of consistent dependency management doesn't just mean that developers can
operate their own environments. It also means that environments can be provisioned and torn down
through automation. The consistency of a single command or process to resolve dependencies, enrich
networking, and automate security is the perfect recipe for integration into CI/CD pipelines!

If every service can be run consistently (e.g. with container platforms) and is aware of its own
dependencies, new environments can be provisioned for each merge request and changes can be
seamlessly promoted into staging and production when merged into relevant branches. This means that
every team can achieve scalable
[GitOps](https://thenewstack.io/what-is-gitops-and-why-it-might-be-the-next-big-thing-for-devops/)
for every developer and every new service added to the application.

## 4. Security

One of the risks introduced by microservice architectures is the need for each service to expose
APIs that broker access to their functionality. Since these services live as separate processes,
communication over a network is one of the only ways for them to connect to each other and receive
requests for processing. This means that each new service exposes an interface that can be accessed
by others, and if developers aren't careful they can accidentally expose it to the wrong parties.

![](./declare-data-breach.png)

Preventing accidental exposure of network interfaces is yet another area where dependency management
can provide support. With developers providing a structured index of their own service's network
dependencies, not only can we automatically resolve those dependencies, but we can also enrich the
environment with the corresponding network policies required to lock it down – only services that
depend on each other can access each other. This structured approach drastically reduces the need
for developers to understand network security tooling, and opens them up to create new services more
freely.

## 5. Flexibility

Another benefit of dependency management with respect to microservices and distributed applications
is flexibility. With developers capturing the details of their immediate dependencies and
associating them with their own services, the resolver itself is free to instrument the
relationships in unique ways in each environment that gets deployed. Want to try out a different API
gateway or service mesh? Want to instrument distributed tracing by capturing ingress and egress
traffic from each service? With automation that can hook into the dependency resolver, operators are
free to experiment with new tools and configs without any code changes to existing services or
distractions for developers.

## Why doesn't it already exist?

Dependency resolution would be an enormously powerful tool solution to enable developers to
collaborate and contribute to cloud-native applications, but can't we use the vast number of package
managers that already exist to help with instrumentation? While it would be nice to use existing
tools, resolving dependencies for networked applications isn't the same as resolving the
relationships between libraries and binaries.

The download of code artifacts that fulfill dependency requirements for libraries all happens at
build-time to create one master binary/library. Microservices however don't get bundled into single
binaries and instead need to be run as independent services and then connected to over a network.
This means that the resolution strategy has additional steps, and happens at an entirely different
lifecycle stage than regular libraries. Turns out, the earliest point in an application lifecycle
that we can properly resolve dependencies for distributed applications is at deploy-time. It is at
this point that we know both the relationships between all services in the stack as well as the
tooling and details of the target environment needed to properly provision and connect services.

To sum it up, it's hard to create a large scale resolver for network dependencies, but doing so
would provide enormous benefits to engineering teams and the cloud community as a whole. If we're to
properly navigate the growing landscape of cloud-native tools, we'll need to learn from dependency
management practices of the past.
