---
title: What the heck is event-driven architecture?
---

Applications have quickly become complex webs of interconnected microservices. Failures in the API
calls between microservices grow more common and far more dastardly - wreaking havoc throughout
applications in unforeseen ways. Accidents and errors can happen even with the most brilliant
engineers and most controlled environments in the world. Unfortunately, this means that outright
elimination of API call failures is not an option. Instead, we have to prepare our applications for
failure, and this is where event-driven architecture comes into play.

{/* truncate */}

If you've worked with or researched microservices in the last decade, chances are you've heard of
and probably implemented event-driven architecture. The pattern has become extraordinarily popular
amongst cloud-native and distributed teams in recent years as it solves some very real problems with
fault tolerance, availability, and coupling of microservices. Instead of communicating directly with
one another through API calls, services publish and subscribe to events. In doing so, both the
publisher and subscriber can exist and perform their work regardless of the other's availability,
thus achieving the fault tolerance needed for the application to support a growing number of users.

This all sounds like a nice silver bullet on the surface, but what even is an event, and do you
leverage event-driven design in an application? In this article, I'll discuss the different uses of
events, the various technologies and practices that can broker events, and the risks involved with
event-driven architecture. I'll even debunk a few myths about event-driven design to boot!

## Types of events[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#types-of-events)

Events are used to communicate with other applications and services – it's that simple. There's a
lot of thought that can go into which events you publish, who subscribes to them, and what contents
go inside the event, but none of that matters when it comes to describing what an event is and what
it can be used for. What matters is whether or not your event needs a response. Is your event just
miscellaneous information that you're making available for other applications to do whatever they
want with, or are you using your event to request additional information from a peer app or service?

### Broadcast notifications[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#broadcast-notifications)

For those of you who still watch live TV, you're probably aware of the fact that others can tune
into and out of the same channel as you at the same time, and they'll see the same content you do.
In fact, the content doesn't change, no matter how many people tune in or out of the channel.
Whether a hundred or a million people are watching, your favorite sportscaster is still going to be
saying the same thing to everyone who tunes in.

Broadcast application events work the same way as broadcast media – the event gets published by a
single entity but can be received by unlimited subscribers. Since the publisher isn't expecting any
kind of response from subscribers, they can continue their broadcast regardless of the number of
viewers on the other end.

![Broadcast event flow diagram](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/broadcast-event.png 'broadcast notifications')

Broadcast events play a critical role in distributed applications, especially for core services like
identity management and payments services. These services use events to communicate with the rest of
the application whenever actions are taken, or important state changes are made. A reporting service
may want to forecast new financial projections whenever payments are processed, or a shipping
service may wish to change delivery targets whenever a user updates their primary residence. The
identity and payments services don't care what others do with the information, but they know that
other services may want to tune in for updates to act on critical information for themselves.

### Action/Response events[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#actionresponse-events)

Broadcast events are great when we don't care who the subscribers are or what they intend to do with
the event information, but they don't help us make regular API calls more fault-tolerant, as
described earlier. Many direct API calls not only know which service it is being made to, but the
response from the service they are connecting to is of great importance. Maybe we need to check the
identity service to make sure the user has 2FA enabled before they can wire money, or maybe we need
to query the product catalog for the latest prices before adding an item to the shopping cart. These
are pervasive and intuitive thoughts and workflows for developers and applications, but how would a
developer go about instrumenting this flow using event-driven architecture?

The answer lies
with [Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS)](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/CQRS.html) – a
pattern involving the separation of workflows and data structures for reading and writing
information respectively. Instead of relying on a single event, which is limited to sharing
information from publisher to subscriber, developers would use two events to replicate their API
calls using event-driven design: one for the upstream service to trigger an action and another for
the downstream service to respond. As long as the downstream knows the name of the action event and
the upstream knows the name of the response event, they can subscribe to each other to fulfill the
bi-directional request.

![Action response event illustration.](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/action-response-event-1024x237.png 'action/response notifications')

This action/response event style has become increasingly popular in recent years. It allows
developers to replace API call flows with near-identical event-driven flows, but swapping to events
outright comes with its own set of hurdles. With direct API calls, developers get to store
application state in memory while they await a response from the downstream API. Events, on the
other hand, require state to be stored and accessible in a more persistent manner. With events,
there's no guarantee that the same instance that published the action event will receive the
response event. As a result, event-driven architectures often demand more thought around session
management and persistence to maintain state between action/response events.

## Event-driven application brokers[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#event-driven-application-brokers)

We've talked a lot about how events make applications fault-tolerant since they don't have to wait
for subscribers, but how does that functionally work? What magic is it that allows these events to
“complete” even when the subscribers are down or otherwise unavailable? The answer is surprisingly
simple – events get stored in a database.

Yes, you really can store your events in just about anything that can persist the events. It's the
fact that the events are persisted that enables fault-tolerance. If a subscriber isn't ready for the
event just yet, either because it's busy handling another event or it crashed, the event remains in
the database until the subscriber comes back up.

This database could be something as raw as the filesystem, or you can dump them right into a MySQL
or PostgreSQL database you already have available. That said, there is an abundance of database
software explicitly designed to handle events. These database solutions are often referred to as
brokers due to the way they mediate the relationship between event publishers and subscribers. There
are several different brands and solutions you can select, but before you dive right into the brands
themselves, you'll need to decide which brokering style is best for your application:

### Queue-backed brokers[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#queue-backed-brokers)

If you've done any research into event-driven architecture, you've probably also heard of the word
“message queue.” Message queues are one of the two ways that event brokers can store and enable
subscription to published events. Publishers simply write their event to a queue, and a subscriber
can pop the events off of said queue when it's ready to be processed. Action/response events are
straightforward to operate and integrate with: events don't stay on the queue forever, which means
that the database can remain generally small, and integration with it is relatively intuitive to
developers who already understand the concept of a queue.

The downside of queue-backed brokers, however, is that multiple subscribers can't consume messages.
Once a subscriber claims a message from a queue, the message is gone and unable to be consumed by a
different subscriber. This means that to distribute a notification to multiple subscribers, a
publisher has to write the message to multiple queues – one for each subscriber.

Fortunately, this isn't as difficult as it sounds with modern brokers. Some solutions,
like [RabbitMQ](https://www.rabbitmq.com/), natively support the notion
of [topics](https://www.rabbitmq.com/tutorials/tutorial-five-python.html) which allow you to publish
once and have the broker handle the writing to multiple queues. Other solutions,
like [AWS SQS](https://aws.amazon.com/sqs/), have sister services
like [SNS](https://aws.amazon.com/sns/) that can connect to SQS to write to multiple queues as well.

![Queue backed broker illustration.](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/queue-backed-brokers-1024x331.png 'queue-backed brokers')

### Event streams[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#event-streams)

The competitive methodology for storing and subscribing to events is through a persistent event
stream, like that seen in [Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org/). In this model, events are
stored permanently in an ordered list and are never popped off like a queuing system. This means
that multiple subscribers can read the same message. It also means that it's up to subscribers to
keep track of which event was the last one they read in. Subscribers can join the stream at
different times, reprocess historical events, and generally control their destiny. This can also
place more responsibility on each subscriber, making it more difficult for developers to
rationalize.

![Event stream diagram.](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/event-stream-1024x538.png 'event streams')

## Myths about event-driven architecture[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#myths-about-event-driven-architecture)

Event-driven architecture is clearly a powerful way to protect distributed systems from inevitable
failure. Still, there's a lot of misunderstanding about what an event is and what value it provides
back to an application.

### Event-driven architecture decouples microservices[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#event-driven-architecture-decouples-microservices)

Developers are readily taught that event-driven architecture “decouples” microservices from one
another, allowing each service to run separately from each other without crashing. While it's true
that these services can now run without crashing, is a subscriber of an event doing anything of
substance if the publisher isn't running or isn't available?

![Decoupling myth illustration.](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/decoupling-myth-1024x230.png 'decoupling myth')

Without the events being published, a subscribing service is generally left idling, burning compute
power waiting for an event to come in. It may not crash, but it certainly isn't doing anything
useful. Don't get me wrong, the fact that it's not crashing is enormously important for fault
tolerance in production environments. However, the application architecture still has dependencies –
subscribing services are still dependent on event publishers to do meaningful work and provide value
back to end-users.

It's essential to capture these events and relationships if teams are to better understand what
their applications are doing. This understanding helps with tracing and debugging requests and
allows for topology maps to be generated, analyzed, and used to educate developers on where and how
to contribute new features effectively.

### Events are asynchronous[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#events-are-asynchronous)

Another myth about events is that they are de facto asynchronous – publishers don't wait for
subscribers and vice-versa and will begin processing if and when they eventually hear from each
other. While this is true of the two types of *brokers* we outlined in this article, which are the
two main types used in event-driven architectures, it is not the nature of an event that makes this
true, but rather the fact that we are using databases to persist events and broker the
relationships.

The usage of a database to broker events is not a requirement. You've most certainly heard of an
event type that does **not** use a database to broker
events, [webhooks](https://sendgrid.com/blog/whats-webhook/). Webhooks involve subscribers
registering themselves with event publishers directly, and events that the publisher ships out are
done using direct, synchronous API calls. This is identical to a “broadcast” event like we described
earlier but highlights that it's the database usage that provides fault tolerance rather than
event-driven architecture itself.

You could even intercept synchronous API calls and force the calls onto a message broker to get this
same fault tolerance for direct API calls between microservices. Instrumentation of this
is **wildly** impractical, which is why it's seldom done, but even its possibility further
highlights that persistence is the secret sauce behind event-driven architecture.

![Async myth illustration.](https://www.architect.io/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/async-myth-1024x181.png 'async myth')

## Enabling event-driven architecture for your application[](https://www.architect.io/blog/2021-02-09/event-driven-architecture#enabling-event-driven-architecture-for-your-application)

Event-driven architecture is powerful, but implementation leaves a lot to be desired – specifically
when it comes to understanding the relationships between services whose communication is managed by
a message broker or event stream. At Architect.io, we strive to make it as easy as possible for
developers to incorporate best-in-breed architecture, like event streaming, into their everyday
workflows. By automating service discovery and network security with each deployment, developers can
more easily and more safely build event-driven design into their applications. Check out some of our
other articles to learn more:

- [A Developer's Guide to GitOps](https://www.architect.io/blog/gitops-developers-guide)
- [Why distributed apps need dependency management](https://www.architect.io/blog/why-distributed-apps-need-dependency-management)
- [Our product docs!](https://www.architect.io/docs/)

Or [sign up](https://cloud.architect.io/signup) and try Architect yourself today!

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/f4674b0abc8893e6538d9988a3f4be56?s=96&d=retro&r=g)

[David Thor](https://www.architect.io/blog/author/david/)

Architect.io Team

- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/lindsay@architect.io)

- [Open Container Initiative: A technical overview of its specifications and benefits](https://www.architect.io/blog/2023-03-14/open-container-initiative-guide/)
- [The top 3 signs you need on-demand environments](https://www.architect.io/blog/2023-03-02/top-3-signs-on-demand-environments/)
- [What is a staging environment?](https://www.architect.io/blog/2022-04-20/what-is-staging-environment/)
- [What is a production environment?](https://www.architect.io/blog/2022-03-21/production-environment-at-different-sizes/)

## Add your thoughts
