---
title: Introduction
description: Learn what Architect has to offer and why you should use it for your IDP
---

import { Button } from '@site/src/components/Button';

## What is Architect?

Architect is a next-gen toolset that helps teams create and deploy cloud-native applications. It
takes the best of infrastructure-as-Code (IaC), like declarative configuration, execution plans,
resource graphs, and change automation, and splits it into a pair of twin frameworks:
[Components](/docs/components/overview) & [Datacenters](/docs/datacenters/overview).

The purpose of this split is simple: **self-service**. Team members are at their best when they are
capable of doing their job without needing to wait on others. These two frameworks are designed to
highlight the skills of Developers and Operators alike to make everyone successful.

### What is a Component?

A Component is an application bundle that includes all of the resources and integration metadata
needed to deploy your application. Unlike infrastructure-as-code, Architect Components don't require
developers to learn or codify any of their own infrastructure. Instead, developers use a
docker-compose-like syntax to describe their application in familiar terms.

Want a private dev environment? Want to create test environments on every pull request? Need to run
a component created by another team or company? By stripping components of infrastructure details
they can be run by anyone in any Datacenter w/out needing to learn anything about how they work.

<Button to="/docs/components/overview" color="slate-blue" size="lg">
  <span>
    Learn more <span aria-hidden="true">→</span>
  </span>
</Button>

### What is a Datacenter?

Datacenters are like infrastructure-as-code templates - a declarative way to manage infrastructure
and automate changes. Unlike traditional IaC however, Architect Datacenters include hooks to bind
infrastructure to individual environments and application resources created by other developers.

These hooks allow Datacenters to do things like create namespaces and DNS zones for each
environment, run application workloads on k8s or ECS, and even generate and issue unique application
credentials. When developers make environments and deploy components, Architect matches the request
to these hooks in the datacenter to create the corresponding infrastructure.

This capability allows Datacenters to relinquish control of environment creation and application
deployment to Developers while ensuring that infrastructure behaves the way your organization needs.

<Button to="/docs/datacenters/overview" color="slate-blue" size="lg">
  Learn more <span aria-hidden="true">→</span>
</Button>

## Why Architect?

Architect was created to help platform teams create and manage an Internal Developer Platform (IDP)
for their organization. The Datacenter gives platform teams control over how their plaform behaves
while simultaneously allowing them to offer the developer-friendly Component framework to their dev
teams as a way to create, test, and deploy cloud-native applications.

Today, platform teams build their own abstractions on top of IaC tools like Terraform to create
IDPs. They curate a set of "blessed" modules and a set of template repositories for popular
languages that come pre-baked with CI workflows. However, even for those willing and able to spend
the time to curate these resources, engineering teams are still left with needs that are beyond
their grasp.

### On-demand dev environments

In the days of the monolith, dev environments were relatively easy. Ensure the required software is
available on your machine, run your database, and run your application. If your personal computer
didn't have enough compute, teams could always setup private dev boxes on remote servers.

However, in the days of microservices and distributed systems, it is exponentially more difficult to
create cloud environments. Developers know how to run their own database and application, but what
about the payments service, the auth service, the shopping cart API, or the dozens/hundreds of other
services that must exist in the environment for your application to run?

Architect ensures that every developer can create end-to-end cloud environments for their Components
with a single command. The dependency management system automatically deploys and integrates with
dependencies avoiding issues with discovery and integration, and the separation of Components from
infrastructure means they can be deployed to the same Datacenter as the Component being tested -
thus ensuring developers don't need to learn the infrastructure requirements of their dependencies.

### Feature environments

The ability to create on-demand environments is useful for more than just discrete developer
testing, but can also be used to automate integration tests. Simply create a CI workflow using your
favorite CI system (GitHub Actions, CircleCI, etc.) that creates an environment, deploys your
Component, runs your tests, and destroys the environment. This simple workflow is perfect for
running against pull requests to build confidence in new features.

### Unique credentials for applications

Managing credentials for applications is one of the hardest parts of securing cloud environments.
Even if you have the capability of setting up rotating credential policies with your secret manager,
your developers still have to tell you when they need new credentials setup. This is exactly the
type of friction that often pushes developers down easier paths and compromises security for the
whole cloud.

Architect uses its native dependency graphing features to determine when one application needs to
talk to another, and uses that metadata to queue up credential generation. Whenever developers
connect to their database or secure dependencies, they'll be automatically issued their own
credentials at deploy-time (if the Datacenter is configured to do so).

### Zero-trust networking

Another benefit of understanding the relationship between cloud-native applications is the ability
to create strict network policies. With Architect, Datacenter creators automatically configure their
favorite CNI to lock down traffic within their cloud so that only the applications designed to talk
to each other can resolve one another. No more relying on the walled garden for network security.

### Portability

The ability to run a single Component in on-demand dev environments, feature environments, staging,
and production can be considered **vertical** portability. As stated earlier, Architect thrives at
this thanks to the recursive delivery offered by Components and their dependency management
features.

However, Architect also enables another type of portability: portability across cloud providers, or
**horizontal** portability. Components can easily be moved from one datacenter to another making
cloud migration easier than every. Components can also be shared with all your customers allowing
each to use a different datacenter to run your Component in _their_ production. By allowing
customers to control their datacenter, you can roll out constant updates to your application without
lengthy engagements to understand the customer's infrastructure needs.
