---
title: Resource hooks
sidebar_label: Hooks
---

import { JsonSchemaDoc } from '@site/src/components/JsonSchemaDoc';

One of the most powerful features of datacenters is the ability for developers to _request_ cloud
resources that get fulfilled uniquely by the datacenter. These resources represent a contract
between Components and Datacenters that allows them both to work together to create and deploy cloud
software.

When Components get deployed, Architect
[extracts](../01-getting-started/02-how-it-works/index.mdx#under-the-hood) all the relevant cloud
resources and queues them up for the datacenter to fulfill with its own [modules](./02-modules.mdx).
The way the datacenter "hooks" into these resource claims to fulfill them is with declarations
inside the environment block of the datacenter configuration.

In doing so, the modules have full access to the resource inputs, but are required to also provide
back the resource "outputs". By providing the relevant output values, datacenters don't need to have
any knowledge of the relationship between the resources, allowing the process of fulfilling the
requests to be as simple as possible. If a deployment expects one of its environment variables to be
populated with the address of a peer service, the datacenter simply needs to cite the url as an
output of the service hook and doesn't actually care what other resources are going to consume the
value. Instead, Architect will ensure the relevant resources get the correct output values.

## Supported resource types

The resources Architect supports are limited only to resources relevant to applications.
Infrastructure resources like VPCs, kubernetes clusters, DNS zones, etc. are only relevant to
applications if they end up being used to fulfill core resource claims. For example, a service can
be fulfilled by a kubernetes cluster or a separate service mesh - the application doesn't care which
so long as it gets a resolvable URL at the end.

Below is a full list of the supported resource types, along with the relevant input/output specs:

### `database`

The `database` resource represents a request for a specific type/version of database. These requests
can be fulfilled by a shared database cluster just as easily as they can be by individual database
clusters. It's up to the datacenter to decide the specifics.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  database {
    when = node.inputs.databaseType == "postgres"

    module "dbCluster" {
      source = "./db/cluster"
      inputs = {
        # ...
      }
    }

    outputs = {
      host = module.dbCluster.host
      port = module.dbCluster.port
      username = module.dbCluster.username
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/database/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/database/outputs.schema.json" />

### `databaseUser`

The `databaseUser` resource type represents a request for a unique set of credentials. Architect
generates these requests on behalf of components whenever it detects that different applications are
asking for access to the same database.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  databaseUser {
    when = node.inputs.databaseType == "postgres"

    module "pgUser" {
      source = "./pg/user"
      inputs = {
        rootUser = node.inputs.username
        rootPass = node.inputs.password
      }
    }

    outputs = {
      username = module.dbCluster.username
      password = module.dbCluster.password
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/databaseUser/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/databaseUser/outputs.schema.json" />

### `deployment`

The `deployment` resource represents a request to deploy and maintain one or more replicas of an
application. For those familiar with Kubernetes, this is a near identical concept to the
[Deployment](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/workloads/controllers/deployment/) resource.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  deployment {
    module "deployment" {
      build = "./k8s-deployment"
      inputs = merge(node.inputs, {
        namespace = module.namespace.id
        kubeconfig = module.k8s.kubeconfig
      })
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/deployment/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/deployment/outputs.schema.json" />

### `service`

The service resource represents an application's need to expose an application for internal network
traffic. These are common for internal APIs.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  service {
    module "service" {
      build = "./k8s-service"
      inputs = merge(node.inputs, {
        name = "${node.component}--${node.name}"
        namespace = module.namespace.id
        kubeconfig = module.k8s.kubeconfig
      })
    }

    outputs = {
      protocol = node.inputs.protocol || "http"
      host = module.service.host
      port = module.service.port
      url = "${nodes.inputs.protocol}://${module.service.host}:${module.service.port}"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/service/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/service/outputs.schema.json" />

### `ingress`

Ingress resources represent an application's need to expose an application for external traffic.
This is common for web applications and external APIs.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  ingress {
    module "ingressRule" {
      build = "./ingressRule"
      inputs = merge(node.inputs, {
        name = "${node.component}--${node.name}"
        namespace = module.namespace.id
        kubeconfig = module.k8s.kubeconfig
        dns_zone = variable.dns_zone
        ingress_class_name = module.nginxController.ingress_class_name
      })
    }

    module "dnsRecord" {
      build = "./dns-record"
      environment = {
        DIGITALOCEAN_TOKEN = variable.do_token
      }
      inputs = {
        domain = variable.dns_zone
        type = "A"
        value = module.ingressRule.load_balancer_ip
        subdomain = node.inputs.subdomain
      }
    }

    outputs = {
      protocol = module.ingressRule.protocol
      host = module.ingressRule.host
      port = module.ingressRule.port
      username = module.ingressRule.username
      password = module.ingressRule.password
      url = module.ingressRule.url
      path = module.ingressRule.path
      subdomain = node.inputs.subdomain
      dns_zone = node.inputs.dns_zone
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/ingress/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/ingress/outputs.schema.json" />

### `cronjob`

Cronjobs represent a request to run a script on a schedule.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  cronjob {
    module "cronjob" {
      build = "./cronjob"
      inputs = merge(node.inputs, {
        namespace = module.namespace.id
        kubeconfig = module.k8s.kubeconfig
      })
    }

    outputs = {
      data = node.inputs.data
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/cronjob/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/cronjob/outputs.schema.json" />

### `secret`

Secret resources represent an application's need to store sensitive data for their applications.
These are often component inputs or outputs.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  secret {
    module "secret" {
      build = "./secret"
      plugin = "opentofu"
      inputs = {
        filename = "${var.secretsDir}--${environment.name}--${node.component}--${node.name}.json"
        content = node.inputs.data
      }
    }

    outputs = {
      data = node.inputs.data
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/secret/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/secret/outputs.schema.json" />

### `dockerBuild`

This resource type is only used when deploying components from source. Each node represents a job
that builds a docker image from the component source. This is common for ephemeral and preview
environments.

#### Example

```hcl
environment {
  dockerBuild {
    module "build" {
      build = "./docker-build"

      environment = {
        DOCKER_HOST = "unix:///var/run/docker.sock"
      }

      volume {
        host_path = "/var/run/docker.sock"
        mount_path = "/var/run/docker.sock"
      }

      inputs = {
        image = "${node.component}-${node.name}"
        context = node.inputs.context
        dockerfile = node.inputs.dockerfile
        args = node.inputs.args
        target = node.inputs.target
      }
    }

    outputs = {
      image = module.build.image
    }
  }
}
```

#### Inputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/dockerBuild/inputs.schema.json" />

#### Outputs

<JsonSchemaDoc schema="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/architect-team/arcctl/main/src/%40resources/dockerBuild/outputs.schema.json" />
