---
title: A simple guide to continuous deployment
---

Continuous Deployment (CD) is a software development practice that enables teams to quickly and
frequently release code changes to production environments. This practice is closely related to, and
often used in conjunction with, Continuous Integration (CI) and Continuous Delivery (CD). In this
blog post, we will discuss what continuous deployment is, how it differs from CI/CD, and the
benefits it can bring to developer velocity and business innovation.

{/* truncate */}

## What is continuous deployment?

In a nutshell, continuous deployment is a process of automatically building, testing, and deploying
code changes to production environments without requiring manual intervention. CD allows teams to
respond quickly to customer feedback and iterate on their product, resulting in faster and more
frequent releases.

### Continuous integration

Continuous Integration (CI) is the practice of automatically building and testing code changes as
soon as they are committed to a code repository. CI helps to identify and fix errors early in the
development process before they make their way into production.

### Continuous delivery

Continuous Delivery (CD) automatically tests and deploys code changes to a staging environment,
where they can be further tested and validated before being deployed to production. CD helps to
ensure that code changes are thoroughly tested and validated before production releases.

### So CI and CD both perform tests? Where's the difference?

The main difference stems from when the tests occur and what is being tested. CI testing is run
against raw source code, whereas CD can run tests against a deployed version of the code.

CI tests can range from linting to unit tests to ensure the code works as intended. The code will
exist as a branch in the repository when CI occurs. CD is run against a deployed version of the
code; a good CD test that could block a merge would be whether a deployment can succeed! CD tests
can also include other verifications that the deployment to a staging environment was successful â€“
such as running integration tests to make sure there are no unwanted side effects from the new code,
overall system tests, or usability tests such as end-to-end testing of an onboarding flow, or
ensuring the new code doesn't break when going through deployment steps like minification.

## Beyond CI/CD

While CI and CD are essential practices that help to ensure code changes are thoroughly tested and
validated, continuous deployment takes it one step further by automatically deploying code changes
to production environments. Implementing CI/CD allows teams to respond quickly to customer feedback
and iterate on their product, resulting in faster and more frequent releases.

## Continuous deployment, development velocity, and innovation

Implementing continuous deployment will positively impact developer velocity within your
organization.

By automating the deployment process, developers can spend less time on manual tasks such as testing
and deploying code changes and more time writing code. This leads to increased productivity as
developers can focus on what they do best, writing code. Additionally, the deployment process
automation can eliminate human error and reduce the risk of issues arising when deploying code
changes.

Faster time-to-market for new features and products is another benefit of continuous deployment. By
automating the deployment process, teams can quickly and frequently release code changes, allowing
them to respond to customer feedback and iterate on their product. This can lead to new, innovative
features and products that better meet customer needs.

Continuous deployment also promotes a culture of experimentation and learning. Teams can quickly
test new ideas and features in production environments and make adjustments based on customer
feedback, allowing teams to quickly identify and address areas for improvement and stay ahead of the
competition.

Moreover, continuous deployment can help achieve faster recovery times for production issues; the
process allows teams to quickly roll back to a previous version of the application in case of any
problems. CD can minimize downtime and reduce the impact on customers.

## Continuous deployment isn't for everyone

Continuous deployment is a powerful software development practice that can benefit an organization,
such as faster time-to-market for new features and products and increased developer productivity.
However, it's important to remember that it may only suit some organizations or teams.

Implementing continuous deployment requires a high level of automation and testing, which means that
teams must have the necessary infrastructure and resources to automate the build, test, and
deployment process. With this automation, it is easier to ensure that code changes are thoroughly
tested and validated before deployment to production, which can lead to issues and downtime.

Additionally, a culture of collaboration and communication is essential for successful continuous
deployment. This culture should foster open communication channels, shared knowledge, and a shared
understanding of the goals and objectives of the project. With this culture, it can be easier to
ensure that everyone is working towards the same goal and that changes are thoroughly tested and
validated before deployment to production.

A robust monitoring and rollback plan is also necessary in case of production issues, including
monitoring the application and infrastructure performance and having a plan in place to roll back
changes in case of issues quickly. With monitoring and a rollback plan, it can be easier to quickly
identify and address issues, leading to increased downtime and potential loss of revenue. It also
makes it hard to identify the root cause of an issue and take corrective action to prevent the same
issue from happening again. A monitoring and rollback plan should include automated monitoring and
alerting and established procedures for identifying, troubleshooting, and resolving issues. Robust
monitoring and rollback plans can help teams identify and address issues quickly, minimizing
downtime and customer impact.

Additionally, it's crucial to have a versioning control system (VCS) in place for your services and
infrastructure; this allows teams to roll back to a specific version of the service in case of
issues. VCS helps ensure that the rollback process is smooth and efficient. Furthermore, it's
essential to have a disaster recovery plan in place to ensure service availability in case of a
major incident.

## Summary

Continuous deployment is a powerful software development practice that can bring many benefits to an
organization, such as faster time-to-market for new features and products, increased productivity
for developers, and a culture of experimentation and learning. However, it's important to remember
that it may only be suitable for some organizations or teams. Implementing continuous deployment
requires a high level of automation and testing, a culture of collaboration and communication, and a
robust monitoring and rollback plan in case of issues in production.

Additionally, having a monitoring and rollback plan, a versioning system, and a disaster recovery
plan can help organizations quickly identify and address issues, minimizing downtime and customer
impact. Overall, continuous deployment is a powerful tool that can help organizations to stay
competitive and responsive to customer needs. Still, it needs to be implemented carefully and with
the right resources.

![](https://secure.gravatar.com/avatar/569dcc89bc0d6965c153ba5e945b39b1?s=96&d=retro&r=g)

[Zachary Jansma](https://www.architect.io/blog/author/zach/)

Architect.io Team

- [Twitter](https://twitter.com/)

- [Simplify your deployments with CI/CD and Kubernetes](https://www.architect.io/blog/2023-03-22/deploy-cicd-kubernetes-tutorial/)
- [A simple guide to continuous deployment](https://www.architect.io/blog/2023-03-09/a-simple-guide-to-continuous-deployment/)
- [Master Terraform: A cheat sheet for infrastructure automation](https://www.architect.io/blog/2023-02-02/terraform-cheat-sheet/)

## Add your thoughts
