---
title: How to manage secrets in Kubernetes
authors: lee.brandt
---

Whenever you set up a system or develop and publish an application, there will be secrets involved.
Previously, we published this [article](/blog/2022/04/14/the-basics-of-secret-management/)
explaining the basics of secrets and secret management. In this follow-up piece, we explore how to
manage secrets in a Kubernetes environment and how you can achieve this using **kubectl** and YAML.

{/* truncate */}

Secrets can refer to either service authentication or configuration parameters. They can also enable
parts of an application topology to connect securely. For example, consider the connection string
you specify in your web server configuration settings to establish connectivity to a database.
Typically, the connection string contains the names of the server and database. It also holds the
administrative user name and password.

In a Kubernetes environment, it is often recommended to use secrets to enable Pods to interact or to
allow applications to connect to external services like databases. Moreover, API keys should always
be stored as secrets. However, managing secrets in a Kubernetes architecture is different from doing
so within traditional application architectures. Therefore, you should manage your secrets on the
Kubernetes level rather than at an application or Pod-specific level. This practice is recommended
for several reasons.

First, this method makes your design more Kubernetes-friendly. Your secrets are stored inside the
Kubernetes clusters. If your application requirements change, such as during a scaling operation
that requires creating multiple Pods in different Kubernetes nodes, your secrets are always
available from the Kubernetes secret store.

Furthermore, Kubernetes stores secrets using Base64 encoding to ensure that any secrets stored in
binary format are handled properly by media that deals only in ASCII.

This article guides you through the management of secrets from creation to viewing using kubectl —
the Kubernetes command-line interface (CLI). Then, it guides you through creating and using secrets
using a secret YAML file.

## Prerequisites

To follow along, you need:

A running Kubernetes infrastructure with both nodes and Pods  
Administrative permissions (or access to a singular namespace on the cluster) to connect using
kubectl  
A [free developer account](https://cloud.architect.io/signup) with Architect

## Create a secret using kubectl

Let's start with creating a secret using kubectl.

First, verify that the Kubernetes cluster is running with the following command:

kubectl get nodes

Then, check for running Pods (assuming you have them). The `-A` parameter lists all Pods in all
namespaces:

kubectl get pods -A

Now that we have validated that the cluster is ready, let's create a secret from the kubectl command
line.

To do this, you first create a file that stores the secret. You define a secret file holding an
admin user account name and a second file holding the password string.

echo admin > admin.txt

echo Sup3rDup3rPa$$w.rd > pw.txt

Please note that there are several ways to create the text files in Windows. We use the `echo`
command to create the file and store the string. This is the most similar technique to that for a
Linux or macOS machine.

Opening the files in a Notepad document exposes the content of both files:

Now, switch to kubectl to create a new Kubernetes secret from both files, using the following
command syntax:

kubectl create secret generic app-credentials \\ --from-file=admin.txt \\ --from-file=pw.txt

Here, `app-credentials` is a name you can choose to identify the secret credentials.

Notice the confirmation from kubectl, stating that the secret `app-credentials` was created
successfully. You can also check which other secrets are available within your Kubernetes
environment using this command:

kubectl get secrets

For more details on the different secret types within Kubernetes, view the
[official documentation](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/configuration/secret/#secret-types).
`Opaque` is the most common type, while the `service-account-token` is for the Kubernetes services.
This enables you to manage and administer the cluster from kubectl.

Moving on, another way to validate your credentials is by using the `kubectl describe secrets`
command:

kubectl describe secrets app-credentials

The next step is to create the Kubernetes secret using YAML, reusing the secret you created from
within kubectl. This time, the secret credentials are mounted as a volume. Any application running
inside your Pods can connect to the volume and use the credential information. This is similar to
using the web.config or appsettings.json config files.

From your favorite editor, create a Kubernetes YAML file containing the following information and
settings:

apiVersion: v1 kind: Pod metadata: name: appcredentials spec: containers:

- name: appcredentials image: redis volumeMounts:
  - name: app-credentials mountPath: “/etc/appcreds” readOnly: true volumes:
- name: app-credentials secret: secretName: app-credentials

Here, you define the creation of a new Pod using a Redis image — one of the smallest containers
available. Next, you specify the `appcreds` volume and mount it as /etc/appcreds into the Ubuntu
Pods.

Note the `readOnly` parameter, which specifies that the volume is mounted in a read-only format.
This prevents any changes to the volume — such as whether a user or process tries to overwrite the
secret credentials.

Also, ensure the `secretName` parameter refers to the secret's name as specified by kubectl. If this
name doesn't match, you receive an error when starting the Pod.

Now, use `kubectl apply` to create a new Pod from the above YAML file:

kubectl apply -f appcreds.yaml

Verify that your container/Pod is running as expected by executing `kubectl get` pods:

From here, you can connect to the running Pod and its local file system, exposing the
`secret-credentials VolumeMount`. To do this, run the following command:

kubectl exec -it appcredentials -- /bin/bash

This brings you to the Pod's file system.

Now, browse to the /etc/appcreds folder and notice the two secret files:

This confirms your Pod has access to the secret files. Now, any application running inside the Pod
would only need a pointer to the etc/appcreds/admin or /pw file to access the contained secrets.

## Create a secret using YAML

You can also directly create a Kubernetes secret from a YAML file instead of using kubectl. This
might better integrate with your DevOps CI/CD process and relies on source control practices to
detect source code changes. However, while this process works well enough, it is crucial to note
that you should try to integrate with a secret store scenario whenever possible — if your DevOps
tool provides the option.

For example declaring a secured password variable such as $SA_PASSWORD in GitLab, GitHub Actions and
other DevOps solutions. The method mentioned here would be applicable if your DevOps tool doesn't
allow for storing secrets, or if you run a Kubernetes deployment without CI/CD integration.

To begin, create an appcreds.yaml file with the following sample contents.

The secret YAML file has the following structure:

apiVersion: v1 kind: Secret metadata: name: app-credsyaml type: Opaque data: password:
Sup3rDup3rPa$$w.rd username: appadmin

Now, try to integrate this secret file into your Kubernetes cluster by using the `kubectl apply`
command:

kubectl apply -f appcreds.yaml

Note that this command fails. The error message explains that the secret strings must be encoded
with Base64. Converting your cleartext strings looks slightly different on Windows than on Linux or
macOS:

On Linux, using `echo -n ‘Sup3rDup3rPa$$w.rd' | base64` returns the encrypted version of the string
as `U3VwM3JEdXAzclBhJCR3LnJkIA0K`.

On Windows, you can use the built-in `certutil -encode/decode` commands to reform the existing text
strings in your admin.txt and pw.txt to Base64 encoding:

\- certutil -encode admin.txt b64admin.txt

- certutil -encode pw.txt b64pw.txt

Checking the contents of both b64admin.txt and b64pw.txt exposes the encoded text string. Paste
these strings into the YAML file, replacing the existing credentials:

apiVersion: v1 kind: Secret metadata: name: app-credsyaml type: Opaque data: password:
U3VwM3JEdXAzclBhJCR3LnJkIA0K username: YWRtaW4gDQo=

Now, the `kubectl apply` command should succeed:

kubectl apply -f appcredsyaml.yml

From here, you could also apply the same secret using the `VolumeMount` option — like the process
outlined in the kubectl example.

## Edit a secret

Sometimes, it might be necessary to update your application secrets — like when your credentials may
be compromised. If you have a POD running for which later on you want to integrate secrets, in most
cases, a POD restart is required.

The easiest way to update your secrets is by using kubectl, including the edit `secrets` keywords
and the name of your stored Kubernetes secret. Note, however, that just because you see the secret
value here, it doesn't necessarily mean that the running POD is currently using this secret.
Therefore, as mentioned earlier, restarting the POD will ensure that it always picks up the latest
secret value:

kubectl edit secrets appcreds-yaml

This opens your default text editor and shows the secret YAML file's contents. On your Windows
machine, using Visual Studio Code, it looks like this:

## Use secrets from environment variables

The previous scenarios both relied on using VolumeMount to present the secrets to a Pod. Another
approach is to point to the secrets from environment variables in your Kubernetes YAML file.

Most previous steps are the same for managing secrets from environment variables. This is because,
in the environment variables, you refer to the secret name and the secret key names you used when
defining them.

Using the `apps-cred.yaml` secret file from earlier, the settings for this new Pod look as follows:

apiVersion: v1 kind: Pod metadata: name: envvarsecret spec: containers:

- name: envvarsecret image: redis env: - name: SECRET_USERNAME valueFrom: secretKeyRef: name:
  app-credsyaml key: username - name: SECRET_PASSWORD valueFrom: secretKeyRef: name: app-credsyaml
  key: password restartPolicy: Never

The name parameter for `secretKeyRef` refers to the secret's name (`run kubectl get secrets` if you
don't remember). The key refers to the settings for the secrets within the secret-config file.

Now, run the `kubectl apply` process again for this Pod:

kubectl apply -f appcredsenvvar.yml

Finally, verify that the Pod is running successfully:

kubectl get pods

## Learn more about Kubernetes and secret management

Applications continuously rely on secrets to interact with one another and establish connections to
other applications' architecture. Moving any application to a Kubernetes environment does not change
its reliance on secrets. It can therefore be extremely helpful to manage these secrets using the
kubectl CLI or YAML configuration files. Fortunately, Kubernetes provides several mechanisms to
store your secrets outside of your application source code.

Managing secrets is just one of the many tasks you must undertake as a Kubernetes Operator or DevOps
specialist. Solutions like [Architect](https://www.architect.io/) can help with your most pressing
application platform delivery needs.

Tightly integrating with your existing DevOps pipeline, Architect can provide blue/green deployments
and secret integrations. Architect is also cloud-provider-independent, ensuring your DevOps teams
can focus on application delivery from within Architect instead of worrying about how to manage it
across different cloud environments.

If you're interested in learning more about how Architect can help supplement your Kubernetes
infrastructure [sign up](https://cloud.architect.io/signup) and get started for free.
